---
title: Comparative Analysis of The U.S. and China’s Approaches to Virtual Currency Regulation
# description: This section is a compilation of internal information and trainings regarding growth marketing and experimentation as concepts
weight: 2
---

## I. Introduction
Economies, like games, are unable to function effectively without the presence of clear rules that are enforced by an entity. A society often operates in static efficiency; using existing technologies, policies are set by institutions in order to maximize the output of goods and services. Few institutions will seek dynamic efficiency: maximizing the rate of production of new products given existing levels of resources. By crafting rules for how new tech should operate, the U.S. and China are two countries that operate very differently in order to encourage dynamic growth of new financial technologies. 

There are multiple ways that the law can promote growth in an economy and innovation. In most fields such as antitrust regulation, statutory changes are the most frequent ways that the law is able to shape the future direction of technology. However, among innovative technologies with complex interdependencies such as the public blockchain, a statutory change may be a less agile regulation than a change in regulatory enforcement or an administrative action taken by a government agency. Furthermore, a change in organizational structure is another method through which the law can adapt in order to foster greater technological growth in the economy. 

Through this paper, we will be looking at how the U.S. and China have adapted to the emergence of virtual currency technology and how changes in the law – as defined by institutional action or policy – are able to influence the future growth of the virtual currency technology. The first portion of this paper will briefly discuss public blockchain technology and its extension into the Financial Technology market. Afterward, the paper will discuss how the U.S. has dealt with the technology as a whole, through dividing jurisdictions over multiple disparate agencies who have taken different stances on how to regulate – or not regulate – virtual currencies. A similar analysis will be conducted to evidence China’s state lead approach to virtual currencies and a future extension will be made to how China leverages its policy to drive State goals through alternative application of the virtual currency technology. To conclude, we will briefly discuss the different regulatory approaches of the U.S. and China

## II. Virtual Currency - Applications of Public Blockchain Technology

Innovations in encryption technology and distributed computing capacity have given space for blockchain technology. Secure, encrypted transactions are made possible by a system of verifications that record and process information transfers. These transactions are then added to a public ledger known as Blockchain that records every transaction in a cloud based system. What makes this technology appealing for industries with sensitive information such as the financial space is, as this information is collected, it’s encrypted and stored into small ‘block’ datasets that are validated through proof of work. Each new block of information can only be added to a chain of blocks after verification is computed by two computers on a network; incompatible blocks are rejected, therefore making the transaction impossible to reverse with no need for third party verification.

Financial technology innovators have applied the cryptographic blockchain technology to form digital currencies that secure and verify transactions. Digital currencies build on a cryptic, blockchain verification system are often referred to as cryptocurrencies. Some operate on a peer-to-peer, decentralized transactional network rather than through any centralized authority. The largest cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, serves as a virtual currency that holds no legal tender status, but can substitute for a transaction. The decentralized currency is a major appeal for Bitcoin’s global applications. Through decentralized and secure technology, many of the deficits in traditional financial transactions such as an unnecessary need of trust and tolerance for fraud are ameliorated. Cryptocurrency transactions are cheaper – Bitcoin payment system charges 1% of transactions compared to 7.37% average remittance fee – and faster theoretically than traditional payment networks due to the lack of third-party intermediaries. Furthermore, decentralization protects against capital controls and censorship, encouraging financial innovation. However, decentralization of a currency creates room for crime and fraud. Regulators have been wary of money laundering, illicit marketplaces, and ransomware associated with Bitcoin. The decentralization makes tracing of criminals who are paid through bitcoin near impossible. Leveraging Blockchain, criminal smart contracts can facilitate leaks of confidential info, steal cryptographic keys, and facilitate real-world crimes.

As this technology proliferates markets, regulators have to make a difficult decision on regulating the market to implement technical safeguards and stringent financial transfers reporting to protect consumers from fraud, while minimizing harm to economic and technological growth. Rather than a pure financial technology, crypto currencies have a built in economic model that works in peer-to-peer transactions, lending itself to a very broad audience with deeper implications for consumers' lives. Cryptocurrencies are multifaceted (as currencies and equity) and global by design and cut into tech, finance, business, and consumer markets. As each of these segments are usually regulated in silos, the pathway to regulating virtual currencies has divergent among countries and within agencies. 

## III. U.S. Regulation of Public Blockchain Virtual Currencies
The central focus of U.S. regulation is to protect investors and consumers while encouraging innovation and dynamic growth. The following study evaluates the overall strategy of the U.S. towards the public blockchain by evaluating different federal agencies and their approach to capacity building. The cautious attitude to encourage market creation of financial technology is displayed by the U.S.’s classification of virtual currencies as a digital form of exchange without the attributes of real currency. Traditionally, the FED is the only agency with the power to coin money and regulate value; the prohibition of ‘unauthorized instruments’ with similar functions to fiat have not been prohibited. Despite the commercial value of Bitcoin, statues against unauthorized instruments have only been used against counterfeit currency.

### A. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
From the start, the SEC has focused its attention to fraud prevention and investor education for detecting potential Ponzi-schemes among virtual currency exchanges. In 2016, the DAO hack instigated the separation of securities and non-securities through the Howey Test. This was an action taken by the SEC to protect consumers from potential fraud, encouraging more sustainable growth of financial technology technology. Over the next 2 years, the SEC cracked down on the ICO market with subpoenas on firms partaking in ICO offerings. This includes halting the listing of an exchange-traded product, SolidX Bitcoin Trust, on NYSE due to the unregulated market of bitcoin, opening liability for lack of surveillance-sharing agreements to prevent potential manipulative actions in the market. The SEC now issues ‘no-action letters’ to inform startups intending on utilizing public fundraising methods using tokens on what actions taken by the company would keep the SEC from taking action. 

Within the SEC, there’s direct regulatory shifts to involve people who are familiar with the technology in positions to determine the direction of regulation. The SEC appointed Hester Peirce, an attorney who specializes in financial market regulation and champions blockchain a Commissioner. The SEC instated Valerie Szczepanik as Sr. Advisor for Digital Assets and Innovation. To further progress their commitment to innovation, the SEC created the Strategic Hub for Innovation and Financial Technology to monitor and interact with innovators in fintech. Although this may not be a direct change in policy, this is a regulatory effort focused on maximizing the growth of the new blockchain technology.

### B. Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)

The CFTC adopts a ‘light touch’ model and is seen as the most supportive federal agency for innovation. Based on a ‘do no harm’ approach, the CFTC hasn’t been proactive in curbing virtual currency trading. The CFTC traditionally only deals with violations of the Commodities Exchange Act such as failing to register as Futures Commission Merchants, prohibitions on wash trading, and anti-fraud enforcement. In 2017, the CFTC launched Lab CFTC as a regulatory action to incite technological growth by creating better accessibility to the CFTC for fintech professionals. The CFTC employs an active learning model to shape it’s perspective on the direction of regtech. This promotes the U.S. model of ‘wait and see’. to promote growth.
### C. IRS

The IRS vaguely grouped virtual currencies under the tax jurisdiction of property. This ambiguity on the exact processing of the technology that has changed significantly since the issued statement in 2014 has brought the ire of many people including Congress. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) convened and issued a broad direction for how regulation should be streamlined to account for increases in FinTech; among these points was the recommendation to test new technology and Fintech regulation in regulatory sandboxes. FSOC addresses the value of new ideas in facilitating economic growth and market efficiency; however, they also mention that not all innovations are good. In order to address and mitigate negative externalities, more information and flexibility is required prior to launching regulations on new technology at scale. They recommend a regulatory ‘sandbox’ as a flexible environment for firms to experiment with new technology without fear of intrusive regulation impeding the natural growth of technology and economic progress. 

The FSOC iterates how the current trajectory of government agencies – creating working groups, conducting outreach across the U.S., and involving innovators in the regtech – process has been largely successful. However, they also mention that many innovators they’ve spoken with have mentioned the confusion on the sheer number of regulatory agencies one must speak with. With too many chefs in the kitchen, the FSOC recommends a regulatory sandbox where meaningful experimentation of innovative products, services, and processes may occur with prompt regulatory relief when necessary. Creating avenues for small entrepreneurial experiments and agile regulation enables regulation to keep on pace with the development of technology while encouraging innovation through the creation of a zone safe from intrusive regulation and potential large harm from detrimental innovation.

## IV. Chinese Regulation of Public Blockchain Technology

Under Article 16, China exhibits a proclivity where the goal of China’s central bank is to issue currency that’s traceable and able to be imposed under monetary controls. The decentralized nature of public blockchain digital currency defies this state goal. Bitcoin was first addressed by “the 2013 Announcement” by the People’s Bank of China (PBoC), declaring virtual currencies such as Bitcoin a virtual asset or digital commodity; financial institutions and payment companies were prohibited explicitly from engaging in bitcoin related business, but the virtual currencies were able to be used to buy and sell online commodities. After the 2013 Announcement declared Bitcoin as a speculative asset and the Chinese government committed to greater oversight of bitcoin sites to reduce money laundering risks, the price of bitcoin dropped 50%. 

In 2017, China banned cryptocurrency financing (ICOs) and shut down cryptocurrency exchange platforms. China classified cryptocurrency as an attempt at ‘coin substitution’ without evaluating the benefits of the secured cryptographic technology. The policy focused on the function of the vehicle of the technology in order to make a policy determination to forbid the circulation of ‘coin substitution’ and the trading of this for fiat currency. China required the disposal of crypto assets by inhabitants. As a result of this ban, a few cryptocurrency trading platforms moved their locations to different  countries. Once one of the largest trading platforms for Bitcoin, China’s restrictive policies on virtual currency exchanges has reduced Bitcoin trading with the Chinese yuan to under 1% of global trading from 90%. 

Though not confirmed, China’s ban on financial institutions augmenting virtual currency transactions may have paved the way for the PBoC to develop their own central bank digital currency. As previously alluded, the issue of the PBoC is with the decentralized nature of Bitcoin that prevented transactional tracing and monetary control from the PBoC. The 2017 Announcement makes no reference to banning mining operations despite the explicit nature of the announcement. The PBoC has been demoing a digital currency with blockchain technology as it’s basis. For China, blockchain based transactions are secure and able to reduce circulation costs while increasing transparency and curbing money laundering and tax evasion. To encourage innovation while reducing volatility of the cryptocurrency market, China’s Postal Savings Bank has been working with IBM to create a Blockchain Asset Currency System. IBM reports that the PSBC’s solution would enable better information sharing, eliminate redundancy credit verifications, and improve operational efficiency by 60-80%. In line with the goal of China's policy makers, new financial products are able to increase operational efficiency with real time information sharing among parties and eliminate trust frictions at a very low price. 

As of 2020, it’s projected that 64% of China will have access to some form of mobile phone, allowing for larger portions of the population to conduct digital transactions on China’s monitored networks. Similar to the goal of the Bahamas in creating the sand dollar, creating a crypto-fiat is also a way to increase accessibility to financial services throughout much of rural China. The Digital Yuan will allow the central bank to monitor digital transaction behavior much more closely, enabling the government to draw deeper and more accurate economic insights into the health of the market, especially among rural areas. This would empower the central bank to expand more effective monetary policy. This is a good example of how regulation is able to shape the development of technology in a direction that benefits the state and encourages expediency of innovation. 

## IV. Evaluations of General Regulatory Direction and Impact on Technological Growth

For driving innovation among multiple sectors of the economy, the U.S. has a better balance between investor protection and facilitating technological change. Although the U.S. tries to loosely mold the budding technology within its existing regulatory frameworks, China has a much clearer stance on decentralized cryptocurrency; despite banning growth of cryptocurrency markets, China’s regulatory policies have encouraged development from a state centrist view. Yet, both approaches are not without fault. 

China and the U.S. have drastically different approaches to regulation in part due to the recognition of cryptocurrency as a functional equivalent to fiat in the U.S. and China delegitimizing cryptocurrency to preserve its regulatory strength in capital controls.The U.S. was able to adopt a flexible approach by regarding cryptocurrencies as an asset. FINCEN’s guidance didn’t recognize it with legal tender but by virtue of labeling it as an asset that it has no jurisdiction over, it enables the legal flexibility for virtual currency to substitute for real currency. This encourages innovation by enabling the technology behind cryptocurrency as a valid method of securing payment transactions through multiple levels of encryption that removes the need for a third party to validate transactions. The gray space has led Chairwoman Yellen of the Fed to declare a lack of jurisdiction over virtual currency transactions. The decentralization with no network operators or central issuers makes it very difficult for the U.S. to regulate virtual currencies (different from security tokens with a central issuer). However, China sees this very differently. Rather than looking towards technology and blockchain as a method of securing transactions, decentralized currency makes the capital controls of the PBoC vulnerable. Placing cryptocurrency transactions under the State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE) would’ve been a technologically impossible and administrative burden for the domestic bank services that would’ve been tasked with tracking and limiting the cryptocurrency transactions of all Chinese users. 

From the perspective of innovators, the ‘Crypto Winter’ was partially attributed to regulatory crackdowns. Companies have reported that crypto-based blockchain projects have reported difficulty with securing funding for their projects in the U.S.. Due to regulatory ambiguity, potential projects into retail and public blockchain projects have been impeded by the regulatory environment. On a global scale, many public blockchain firms have adopted foreign domiciles due to the U.S. being ‘unfriendly’ to virtual currencies.

China’s Internal Announcement does little to deter foreign cryptocurrency transactions, with many Chinese entrepreneurs establishing platforms overseas while still targeting the Chinese public. Small loopholes leave vulnerabilities with no effective measures to curb the widespread traces of cryptocurrency. Furthermore, unilaterally labeling cryptocurrencies as liable to fraud by nature could undermine China’s own efforts to establish the Digital Yuan.

## V. Conclusion
The U.S. Regulatory response has been fragmented among agencies; however a general trend is present where not much statutory change has been taken. Instead, many a hodgepodge of agencies have disjointly created their own working groups to better understand the change in the technological landscape. Although the combination of multiple agencies adapting themselves to create more agile regulation is a good organizational change that encourages technological growth, many entrepreneurs have expressed confusion and frustration at the ambiguous bureaucracy of disjointed agency positions. Furthermore, the U.S. definition of securities can be over-inclusive since some tokens classified as securities may not be profit making with no expectation on return of capital. This could potentially increase costs and stifle innovation as companies may choose to forgo ICOs for other fundraising methods. On the other hand, China’s drastic crackdowns on cryptocurrency may seem antithetical to the development of technology. Yet, China is able to pivot their regulatory actions to best serve the interests of the financial regime in place by the PBoC. Although independent innovation is stifled, the state policies are able to focus innovation and spurt dynamic growth of virtual currency technology. 

## Bibliography
Brito, Jerry, and Andrea Castillo. “Bitcoin: A Primer for Policymakers,” n.d., 111.
Statista. “China: Mobile Phone Internet User Penetration 2015-2025.” Accessed December 13, 2020. https://www.statista.com/statistics/309015/china-mobile-phone-internet-user-penetration/.
CoinDesk. “China’s Bitcoin Exchanges Survived the Crackdown,” January 12, 2014. https://www.coindesk.com/chinas-bitcoin-exchanges-survived-the-crackdown-battle-aftermath.
Cohney, Shaanan, David Hoffman, Jeremy Sklaroff, and David Wishnick. “COIN-OPERATED CAPITALISM.” Columbia Law Review 119, no. 3 (2019): 591–676.
Groden, Claire, Edoardo Saravalle, and Julia Solomon-Strauss. “UNCHARTED WATERS: A Primer on Virtual Currency Regulation Around the World.” Center for a New American Security, 2018. http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep20458.
ChinaPower Project. “How Will a Central Bank Digital Currency Advance China’s Interests?,” August 20, 2020. http://chinapower.csis.org/china-digital-currency/.
“IBM and Chinese Bank Team for Blockchain Platform.” CTB10, January 10, 2017. www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/51358.wss.
Johnson, Sam, David G Reichert, Peter J Rosk Am, Gary J Andres, Richard E Neal, Ran King Member, Sander M Levin, et al. “KEVIN BRADY, TEXAS, CHAIRMAN,” n.d., 3.
Jr, Paul H Farmer. “Speculative Tech: The Bitcoin Legal Quagmire & the Need for Legal Innovation.” Journal of Business, n.d., 23.
Juels, Ari, Ahmed Kosba, and Elaine Shi. “The Ring of Gyges: Investigating the Future of Criminal Smart Contracts.” In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 283–95. Vienna Austria: ACM, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978362.
Mnuchin, Steven T. “Report to President Donald J. Trump,” n.d., 222.
Ratna, Tanvi, Richard Abisla, Subhodeep Jash, Aditya K. Kaushik, Sylvia Mishra, Ananth Padmanabhan, Pranesh Prakash, Joshua Simons, Madhulika Srikumar, and Kaliya Young. “Blockchain Regulation in the United States:: Evaluating the Overall Approach to Virtual Asset Regulation.” The Promise of Public Interest Technology: New America, 2019. http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep19980.9.
New America. “The Promise of Public Interest Technology: In India and the United States.” Accessed December 16, 2020. http://newamerica.org/fellows/reports/anthology-working-papers-new-americas-us-india-fellows/.
Xie, Rain. “Why China Had to ‘Ban’ Cryptocurrency but the U.S. Did Not: A Comparative Analysis of Regulations on Crypto-Markets Between the U.S. and China.” Washington University Global Studies Law Review 18, no. 2 (January 1, 2019): 457–92.
Zhang, Laney. “Regulation of Cryptocurrency.” Web page, June 2018. https://www.loc.gov/law/help/cryptocurrency/china.php.
