---
title: Information Privacy - The New Human Right
# description: This section is a compilation of internal information and trainings regarding growth marketing and experimentation as concepts
weight: 2
---

# I. Introduction
Technology is evolving at a pace so rapid that previous guidelines on how humans are able to interact with each other are being rewritten organically. Half a century ago, people would only have information on their neighbors. Information was either intentionally or inadvertently disclosed by individuals with the.  expectation that a person is entitled to their privacyFor many, this idea of privacy is an ingrained human dignity that should not be violated.

Over the past few decades, rapid advances in internet technology have created new relationships between individuals and society. Online communication allows individuals to interact with people outside of their direct vicinity; businesses are able to reach customers from halfway across the world and foster a relationship with their customers even when they’re at home. At the same time, the walls that define one’s home and the privacy within these walls become ambiguous. Information about a person’s habits, likes and dislikes, and their thoughts become a widely available ‘digital biography’. Now, information that someone intentionally or inadvertently discloses to those they interact with can be shared to everyone in the world in the form of data. A person’s data can be utilized by businesses or governments to monitor every action of a person’s life even if they’re in the confines of their own homes. Businesses are able to collect information from every interaction they have with a customer and subsequently use this information to better market their products; for some businesses, these interactions themselves are products to be sold to others as consumers are commoditized. 

 With our digital transformation of society comes heavy implications for ownership of this data and how a person’s information can be used and shared. In the spirit of Polanyi’s double movement, society aims to create legislation in order to protect individual dignity from the moraless market that aims to efficiently allocate people’s information to generate the most market value. 

In this paper I will be exploring how rapid advancements in information technology have necessitated the creation of a new legal right: the right to digital privacy. New extensions of tracing capabilities may defy any expectations held by legislators of the past rendering traditional privacy frameworks antiquated. In a constant attempt to catch up to technology, the law is adapted to become a new legal category that must be continually updated in order to fill loopholes exploited by rapid technological developments. In the process of exploring the transformation from traditional privacy regulation to new legal categories of digital privacy, I will begin with the legal history of privacy in the U.S.. I will then summarize differing arguments justifying regulation on data collection and usage. Once justification for regulation has been established, I will identify gaps in  new legal categories for information privacy protection and case studies show how technological development continues to push for the creation of new legislation.

# II. Privacy and the Law
In order to discuss how information technology infringes on a person’s privacy and why the United States as a country cares to protect privacy, it’s important to understand how privacy is defined and consequently, legislated. There are many ways to define privacy: the right to one’s information; the right to live without external intrusions; the ability to conduct transactions without disturbance; and confidentiality. Generally, privacy involves the disclosure of one’s information and having control over others’ access to this information. For some, privacy is engaged with as a social contract among people in a society. A reasonable expectation of privacy is a baseline set to protect users while also providing flexibility for individuals to determine how their information is shared. For others, privacy is an intrinsic right as humans. A person’s actions and information in private is directly related to their dignity as a person and should never be intruded on by others. For many in the U.S., privacy falls under the label of a negative right to be protected from the surveillance of external parties. Translated to the legal realm, privacy is often conveyed through the separation of public and private domain, encapsulating bodily integrity, privacy of communication, and family life.

One of the first mentions of privacy as a right among legal documents is the American Convention on Human Rights (1969). Article 11 briefly mentions that everyone has the right to have their honor and dignity recognized; no one may interfere with the private life, family, home, or correspondence of an individual. This alludes to the importance within legal frameworks for the government to ensure the dignity of people through protecting their private details from external interference. Whatever information a person chooses to release is at the discretion of that individual and should not be handled by external parties.

Embedded within the right to privacy of communication is the idea of anonymity. According to the World Wide Web Consortium (W3), anonymity and privacy as a right is first conveyed through the U.S. First Amendment. Protection of anonymity of an individual withholding their identity is closely related to free speech of individuals; the privacy to communicate without fear of repercussion is closely linked to the ability of human rights workers in reporting abuse, political dissention against governments, or even people who wish to discuss controversial literature.

Anonymity protects diversity of thought and contributes to diversity of society. This is hence recognized by the U.S. First Amendment and solidified by court opinions. The Supreme Court voted 7-2 in McIntyre v. Ohio Elections Commission (1995) that it is within the rights of a speaker under the First Amendmentwithhold information such as name and address while distributing campaign literature. The court’s ruling in 1995 was an indication for lower courts that the privacy of an individual is a right to be protected; information that they choose to withhold cannot be held against them, nor can another entity share the information of another without prior consent. However we can see that when it comes to privacy, even the court has not remained consistent in its ruling. In Doe v Reed (2010) the Supreme Court ruled 8-1 in favor of a disclosure requirement for campaign signatures. Justice Scalia mentioned in a dissenting opinion ‘we should not repeat and exten the mistake of McIntyre …’. Even outside the realm of technological changes, privacy is a difficult issue to legislate with opinions that often change depending on societal views of privacy and transparency. Formal legislation on how privacy should be addressed in a traditional sense has leaned towards protecting the privacy of individuals; however, this remains contingent on how the concerns of citizens toward the dissemination of their information develops. 

While protection of privacy has been extended by the court, the sheer volume of information that can now be collected has changed much of the applicability of current law. With developments through web technology, a company is able to have a complex understanding of a person’s identity and preferences; if a company is able to trace everything a person searches, everywhere they’ve been, and all items they’ve looked at, then it remains difficult for people to maintain the expectation of anonymity. The high level of intrusion has created a brand new legal category; the conversation on privacy has shifted from anonymity of users, to determining the extent of control an individual has over their personal information. 

# III. Justification for Regulation of Digital Information

Advances in technology have allowed companies to enter all aspects of an individual’s life, digital or even physical. It’s estimated that per day, 7.5 septillion gigabits of data are generated around the world. Each packet of data can be traced back to an individual and analyzed to see where an individual goes, what they’ve purchased, and who they’ve been around, leading to a complex image of how a potential customer thinks and acts. However, this new industry of data collection and processing has led to many benefits on behalf of the user. Some proponents of less privacy argue that information should be a public good as firms are able to use this information to improve society and the quality of life for the public. Therefore, from a political-economic perspective, unless there is a clear indication of market failure, the government should not intervene with the data processing market. Hence, prior to recent years, the U.S. has taken a stance of allowing self regulation by industry; even now the U.S. has no uniform policy for how consumer data should be collected and used. 

Ideas on government intervention to protect consumer privacy falls under four primary camps. The first camp argues that there is a clear case of market failure as consumers aren’t offered implicit or explicit property rights on their personal information. Constant surveillance and record keeping by external parties affronts the dignity of people who have no option but to use the internet. The second camp takes the perspective that information collected on individuals is unavoidable; the personal information of a user should belong to the consumer, but the individual may offer to trade some of the information to companies for benefits. This stance brings bargaining power for consumers in the national information market with asymmetric benefits for companies. The third camp argues for a free flow of information so society can benefit from shared information. Once an individual reports information online, they forfeit rights to their information and consequently, the information of individuals should belong to firms who are collecting, organizing, and generating value from the information. This is a view among market fundamentalists that an efficient allocation of resources such as information will lead to more benefits for consumers. In the instance of malicious usages, self regulating mechanisms such as consumer preferences will shift to reflect the desires of consumers. The U.S. has leaned towards the fourth stance of applying a varied response depending on the information being handled and the industries involved. 

A strict stance on data privacy would consider all personal information as private property. However, this broad definition has implications such as the inability to conduct anything without the approval of an individual. For instance, a credit bureau wouldn’t be able to send information to lenders without explicit approval. Among legal scholars, there is no clear consensus on the definition for how one determines information privacy rights. Limitations on legal decisions from the court in defining information privacy specifically means that much of the decisions on privacy have been made by industry and separate states. When laws are enacted to react to changes in how technology interfaces with consumer information, many legislators follow the guidelines set by the FTC in 2002: notice, consumer choice, access, security and enforcement. When no laws specifically addressed the issue of data privacy, the FTC encouraged legislators to create and enforce guidelines to ensure websites are transparent with their users on how their information is being collected and used; furthermore, a customer should have access to and choose how their personally identifiable information is processed and/or deleted. This firmly places ownership of information into the hands of the consumer. The FTC reports in their study that self regulation of industry has been insufficient in protecting the privacy of users and creating market failure that necessitates legislation and enforcement to protect consumers

# IV. Information Privacy & The Law
The lack of technical knowledge among legislators and the rapid development of technology often makes laws dictating technology archaic and outdated. When communication technology was first introduced through the telephone, the Court ruled in Olmstead v. US (1928) that police who collected evidence from wiretapping telephone conversations were not in violation of the 4th and 5th amendment. It was only in Katz v. US (1967) that the notion of ‘search’ was extended to include technological means and a doctrine of ‘reasonable’ expectation of privacy was created. Advances in how people converse with each other and the privacy of their conversation are an example of how the law has had to adapt it’s previous conceptions of privacy to match the new mediums that people interact with. 

In order to navigate this new right of information privacy, the U.S. has focused on specific industries that may harm consumers most. Clear examples of laws targeted to protecting the data of sensitive groups include COPPA which requires parental notification and consent for any information practices involving children. The US has also passed the Consumer Credit Reporting Act and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley-Act to offer consumers protection for their sensitive financial information. Though many movements to protect consumer data are well intended, many informational privacy laws have had mediocre effects and mixed influences for users. 

The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) created a national standard to attribute ownership and control over sensitive medical information to consumers. Although this was a large step towards protecting information for users, HIPAA itself was seen as overreaching with unintended consequences of threatening medical research and advements. Each year, compliance with HIPAA costs the medical industry an estimated $8.5B. 
In the absence of federal protections for the overall consumer data market, states such as California have been pioneering privacy policies. Embedded within Article 1 of California’s constitution is the protection of privacy. California positions itself as a key state in defining the conversation for internet privacy due to the prominence of the Silicon Valley, where the importance of data privacy is a salient issue for both workers and consumers. The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) of 2018 updated guidelines the FTC published many years ago to include greater control and access for consumers. Although this may have been a strong start to consumer protections, rapid changes in the market have left the CCPA obsolete in a few ways. Tech companies have been able to find loopholes in the semantics of the CCPA and have adapted their technology to further utilize consumer information while turning a blind eye to legislators. Thus, the law had to once again adapt to changes in technology through the recent passing of Prop 27, to prevent companies from sharing personal information. 
# V. Case Studies on Privacy in the Market
Many case studies identify a lag in legislation updating at a slower pace than growth in technology.. When COPAA was first enacted, legislators assumed that adults would have the full ability to moderate and understand the content their children were consuming. As a proactive measure, companies had to ensure there were sufficient moderators for interactive activities to monitor the safety of children’s forums and also ensure that their practices were not in violation of children’s privacy. However, the development of voice search technology made COPAA as it was incompatible with the current rules of COPAA. 

As a technology, voice search technology, such as Google Assistant or Alexa, are always on and passively connecting information on users. Even if much of this data is dark data, meaning unused information, voice search assistants are unable to identify underage users and moderate their content accordingly. Yet, benefits of this technology were apparent enough for the FTC to change its stance on COPAA and voice search. The FTC made comments on amendments to COPAA that voice search technology had immense benefits for children and people with disabilities that couldn’t be easily molded to current legislation. New laws can quickly become antiquated and must be changed to adapt for new modes of consumption.

In the absence of established privacy guidelines, a few companies have taken the initiative to offer protections for their consumers. Known as privacy by design, companies often try to follow fair information practices (FIPs) by implementing privacy measures in their software’s design. This shift establishes companies around end-user goals and constraints in the process of building a product.

To shield its users from unsolicited external tracking, Apple recently released a software option allowing users to disable ad trackers. This move by Apple is an example of a company that aims to pioneer data privacy practices for their customers, albeit to gain market share. This was met with significant backlash from companies such as Facebook who have tried to communicate to users safety of collected information. To follow FIPs while maintaining business revenue from customer information, Facebook utilizes hashing to remove information that is identifiable. Thus, while collecting information on users and tracking their purchases inside and outside the web, customers are able to preserve their individual privacy while also benefiting from the optimization of their collective data. 

Rapid advancements in web technology have necessitated the creation of a new right to information privacy for consumers; with this new right have been nebulous attempts at defining how to balance the double movement of optimal advancements for consumers, while protecting the dignity of individuals. Due to the massive scale of data collection made possible by new advancements in technology, many people in the U.S. have abandoned the concept of the secrecy paradigm. As consumers adapt to a new norm of information privacy violations, new regulations have been focused on empowering users with the autonomy to choose where and how their data is being processed. However, we’ve seen based on our discussions on legislation as well as industry self regulation that technology develops so rapidly that both have difficulty adequately providing protections for consumers while optimizing benefits for consumers with data that is collected. As legislators take steps within the new legal category of information privacy, they must continue to project potential for technological improvements in order to make laws that are applicable beyond specific applications of technology and are able to account for potential new developments.

# Bibliography
“Are Companies Using Semantics to Get around CCPA’s ‘sale’ Provision?” Accessed November 12, 2020. https://iapp.org/news/a/blinders-up-how-organizations-dance-around-sale-under-ccpa/.
BetaNews. “Dark Data and Why You Should Worry about It,” February 19, 2016. https://betanews.com/2016/02/19/big-dark-data/.
 FTC, “Enforcement Policy Statement Regarding the Applicability of the COPPA Rule to the Collection and Use of Voice Recordings” (2017). https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/public_statements/1266473/coppa_policy_statement_audiorecordings.pdf
Hahn, Robert W., and Anne Layne-Farrar. “THE BENEFITS AND COSTS OF ONLINE PRIVACY LEGISLATION.” Administrative Law Review 54, no. 1 (2002): 85–171.
Justice Scalia. v. ( 561 U. S. ____ (2010) ), U.S. (U.S. Supreme Court 2010). https://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/09-559.ZC4.html
News Break. “Facebook Says Apple’s IOS 14 Anti-Tracking Features Will Cut 50% of Its Audience Network Ad Revenue.” Accessed November 12, 2020. https://www.newsbreak.com/news/2048207234472/facebook-says-apples-ios-14-anti-tracking-features-will-cut-50-of-its-audience-network-ad-revenue.
Pitofsky, Robert, Sheila F Anthony, Mozelle W Thompson, Orson Swindle, and Thomas B Leary. “Federal Trade Commission.” PRIVACY ONLINE, n.d., 208.
Solove, Daniel J. “Access and Aggregation: Privacy, Public Records, and the Constitution.” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, September 24, 2001. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.283924.
The Handbook of Privacy Studies: An Interdisciplinary Introduction. Amsterdam University Press, 2018. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvcmxpmp.


