content/en/docs/_index.md, before:

---
title: Documentation
linkTitle: Docs
menu: {main: {weight: 20}}
weight: 20
---

{{% pageinfo %}}
This is a placeholder page that shows you how to use this template site.
{{% /pageinfo %}}

This section is where the user documentation for your project lives - all the
information your users need to understand and successfully use your project.

For large documentation sets we recommend adding content under the headings in
this section, though if some or all of them don’t apply to your project feel
free to remove them or add your own. You can see an example of a smaller Docsy
documentation site in the [Docsy User Guide](https://docsy.dev/docs/), which
lives in the [Docsy theme
repo](https://github.com/google/docsy/tree/master/userguide) if you'd like to
copy its docs section.

Other content such as marketing material, case studies, and community updates
should live in the [About](/about/) and [Community](/community/) pages.

Find out how to use the Docsy theme in the [Docsy User
Guide](https://docsy.dev/docs/). You can learn more about how to organize your
documentation (and how we organized this site) in [Organizing Your
Content](https://docsy.dev/docs/best-practices/organizing-content/).

Commit message:

Changing format to include document structure tree only and updated content

content/en/docs/_index.md, after:

---
title: Howdy and Welcome to My Writing Archive!
linkTitle: Docs
menu: {main: {weight: 20}}
weight: 20
---

<!-- {{% pageinfo %}}
The root page is to help with navigation through the site.
{{% /pageinfo %}} -->

Welcome aboard! You've just landed on a special corner of the internet - my very own Confluence replica. Here, I've compiled a diverse range of my writings from the academic to the creative, from deep-dive research papers to lively blog posts and persuasive campaigns.


My writing style? Let's call it a cocktail of structured analysis and practical application with a twist of approachability. It's all about breaking down complex ideas into digestible pieces, making sure everyone can understand, no matter their background.


To help you find your way around, there's a handy document tree on the left. It's sort of like a map, guiding you through the different topics covered in my work. Each page is a new adventure, holding a separate topic ready for exploration.


So whether you're here out of curiosity, looking for some specific insights, or just love a good read, there's something for you. Feel free to browse through, dive into the topics you find intriguing, and enjoy the journey through my world of words.
